The Empire of Japan (Japanese: 大日本帝國/大日本帝国, Hepburn: Dai Nippon Teikoku/Dai Nihon Teikoku), also known as the Japanese Empire or Imperial Japan, was the period of Japanese history spanning 79 years, starting with the Meiji Restoration on 3 January 1868, and ending with ratification of the Constitution of Japan on 3 May 1947.[8] From August 1910 to September 1945, it included mainland Japan, Okinawa, the Kurils, Karafuto, Korea, and Taiwan. The South Seas Mandate and concessions were de jure not internal parts of the empire but dependent territories. In the closing stages of World War II, with Japan defeated alongside the rest of the Axis powers, the formalized surrender was issued on 2 September 1945, in compliance with the Potsdam Declaration of the Allies, and the empire's territory subsequently shrunk to cover only mainland Japan. However, Okinawa was later returned to Japan in 1972.[13]

Under the slogans of "Enrich the Country, Strengthen the Armed Forces"[c] and "Promote Industry"[d] which followed the Boshin War and the restoration of power to the emperor from the shogun, Japan underwent a period of large-scale industrialization and militarization, often regarded as the fastest modernization of any country to date. Economic and political turmoil in the 1920s, including the Great Depression, led to the rise of militarism, nationalism, statism and totalitarianism, during which Japan joined the Axis alliance with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy, conquering a large part of the Asia–Pacific;[14] during this period, the Imperial Japanese Army (IJA) and the Imperial Japanese Navy (IJN) committed numerous atrocities and war crimes, including the Nanjing Massacre.[15][16][17][18][19] There has been some debate over defining the political system of the Empire of Japan as a dictatorship, due to the absence of a dictator,[20] as well as calling it fascist. Other suggested terms are para-fascism,[21] militarism, corporatism, totalitarianism,[22] and police state.[23]

The Imperial Japanese Armed Forces initially achieved large-scale military successes during the Second Sino-Japanese War and the Pacific War, most notably in the attack on Pearl Harbor in Hawaii on 7 December 1941. However, from 1942 onwards, and particularly after decisive Allied advances at Midway Atoll and Guadalcanal, Japan was forced to adopt a defensive stance against the United States. The American-led island-hopping campaign led to the eventual loss of many of Japan's Oceanian island possessions in the following three years. Eventually, the American military captured Iwo Jima and Okinawa Island, leaving the Japanese mainland unprotected and without a significant naval defense force. The situation became desperate for Japan as they faced a two-front war due to the Soviet invasion of Manchuria, in addition to the United States dropping two atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki with overwhelming destructive power. Plans had been made for an Allied invasion of mainland Japan, but were shelved after Japan accepted unconditional surrender under the Potsdam Declaration on 14 August 1945.

On 15 August 1945, the Japanese Emperor announced Japanese surrender to the Allies on the radio. However, the Pacific War only officially came to an end on 2 September 1945, leading to the end of the Empire of Japan and the beginning of the Allied occupation of Japan, during which United States military commander Douglas MacArthur administered the country. In 1947, through Allied efforts, a new Japanese constitution was enacted, officially ending the Japanese Empire and forming modern Japan. During this time, the Imperial Japanese Armed Forces were dissolved. It was later replaced by the current Japan Self-Defense Forces in 1954. Reconstruction under the Allied occupation continued until 1952, when the Treaty of San Francisco as a peace treaty took effect.

In total, the Empire of Japan had three emperors: Meiji, Taishō, and Shōwa. The Imperial era came to an end partway through Shōwa's reign, and he remained emperor until his death in 1989.